.TH A5D2_PIO_STATUS "8" "January 2016" "sama5d2_utils\-0.90" SAMA5D2_UTILS
.SH NAME
a5d2_pio_status \- report status of the Parallel I/O controller lines
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B a5d2_pio_status
[\fI\-a\fR] [\fI\-b BN\fR] [\fI\-B\fR] [\fI\-d\fR] [\fI\-e\fR] [\fI\-f STR\fR]
[\fI\-h\fR] [\fI\-i\fR] [\fI\-p PORT\fR] [\fI\-s\fR] [\fI\-S\fR] [\fI\-t\fR]
[\fI\-v\fR] [\fI\-V\fR] [\fI\-w\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Atmel's SAMA5D2 family of SoCs have one Parallel I/O controller for all 128
GPIO lines. Confusingly it has a single peripheral identifier (18) but it
has four interrupts, one for each bank of 32 GPIO lines (ids: 18, 68, 69
and 70). The banks are named 'A', 'B', 'C' and 'D' and by convention
each GPIO is named with a leading 'P' followed by the bank letter and
then a line number within that bank. So the 128 lines are named PA0\-PA31,
PB0\-PB31, PC0\-PC31 and PD0\-PD31. This utility accepts lower case letters
as in 'pa15' for bank 'A', line 15.
.PP
This utility only reads the state of one or many GPIO lines (with some minor
exceptions). To change the state of a GPIO line use the a5d2_pio_set utility.
xxxxxxxx
.PP

 a Power Management Controller (PMC)
which achieves power reduction by allowing clocks that run other macrocells
to be slowed down or stopped. The PMC macrocell also controls the PCK0, PCK1
and PCK2 programmable clocks which are available via GPIOs.
.PP
Various system devices and peripheral devices have clocks controlled by the
PMC macrocell. Peripheral devices are identified using numeric "id"s (e.g.
TC0 (Timer Counter block 0) is 35). Some peripheral devices get two clocks:
a "peripheral clock" and a "generic clock". The peripheral clock is typically
the master clock (e.g. 166 MHz) is is enabled by the EN bit in the Peripheral
Control Register (PCM_PCR). The generic clock is enabled by the GCKEN bit is
the same register and is a lot more flexible: its clock source chosen via
the GCKCSS which can be divided by the value in the GCKDIV field.
.PP
The default action of this utility (i.e. when no options are given) is to
list peripheral ids who have their peripheral/generic clocks enabled.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-a\fR
list the status of all gpio lines is the given port. If \fI\-p PORT\fR option
is not given  then bank 'A' is assumed.
.TP
\fB\-b\fR \fIBN\fR
\fIBN\fR can be a complete GPIO line name (e.g. 'PA7' or 'pd23') or a number
between 0 and 31 inclusive. The second form (i.e. number only) requires the
\fI\-p PORT\fR option to be given to complete the GPIO line name.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR
makes the status information briefer. Can be use multiple times to reduce
the status information even more.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
when used with the \fI\-t\fR (translate) option the direction of the
peripheral function is shown after the peripheral line name. The direction
will be one of "[\-]", "[i]", "[o]", "[io]", "[output]" and "[?]". The
first is an internal error, followed by input, output and input+output.
It is not obvious from the Atmel documentation what the difference
between "[o]" and "[output]" is. The last direction "[?]" is when no direction
is indicated.  For example: a peripheral line name of "SDMMC0_CD" (card
detect) becomes "SDMMC0_CD [i]" when this option is given.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR
enumerate information held in tables by this utility. When used once, each
PIO pin is listed (32 rows by 4 column, a column for each bank. Following
each PIO name is the corresponding gpio kernel line number which run from
0 to 127. For example, one cell looks like this: "PB21: 53".
.br
When this option is used twice then all the possible peripheral function
names (up to six per PIO line) for all lines in all blanks are listed
with output like this: "PA13: SDMMC0_CD, -, -, -, FLEXCOM3_IO1, D8". To
reduce the volume of output, only one bank is shown if the \fI\-p PORT\fR
option is given.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fISTR\fR
if \fISTR\fR is found in peripheral function names, output matches then
exit. This option does not require a SAMA5D2 family SoC to be present. If
\fISTR\fR is a GPIO line name (e.g. "PC23") then the possible peripheral
function names for that GPIO line are listed. Otherwise the GPIO line name
and peripheral function name which contains \fISTR\fR is output, one match
per line. [The "contains" criteria is as per the C library strstr() function
also known as finding a needle in a haystack.]
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
print out usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR
when given the interrupt status register (PIO_ISRx) for the containing bank
is read. So the register contains a bit for each line in the bank. If a
bit is set then there has been a change on the corresponding line since the
previous PIO_ISRx call to that bank, or since a reset. If the bit is 0 then
there has been no change in that period.
.br
The PIO_ISRx registers are only read when this option is given. It is
potentially dangerous because it may clear the state of a line in the same
bank other than the line the user is interested in.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR \fIPORT\fR
\fIPORT\fR may be a single letter or a number. If it is a letter then it
should be 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' representing a bank. If it is a number then
it is interpreted as a kernel gpio line number. These numbers range from
0 to 127; 0 to 31 are in bank 'A' and correspond to PA0 to PA31; PB0
corresponds to 32 while PBD31 cooresponds to 127.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR
summarizes all lines in a bank It is eqivalent to this sequence of
options: '\-a \-BB \-t'. Example: 'a5d2_pio_status \-s \-p C'.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR
for each line in each bank (with each bank as a column) the decoded I/O line
function is shown.
xxxxxxxxx
.TP
\fB\-t\fR
translates a GPIO line name and peripheral type to functional name (e.g. PD15
peri_b \-> FLEXCOM4_IO3).


.TP
\fB\-v\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output). Additional output
caused by this option is sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR \fIWPEN\fR
if \fIWPEN\fR is 0 then this utility will attempt to disable the write
protect feature on the TCB associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR. If \fIWPEN\fR is
1 then this utility will attempt to enable the write protect feature on the
TCB associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR. If \fIWPEN\fR is \-1 then this utility
will attempt to show the current state of the write protect feature on this
TCB. This utility will exit immediately after the actions associated with
this option.
.SH NOTES
The SAMA5D2 Power Management Controller (PMC) reduces power by turning off
the master clock going to various macrocells. At power up almost all
macrocells are turned off. During boot up the kernel turns on those
macrocell clocks that it needs.
.SH EXAMPLES
To view the available system and peripheral clocks:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc \-e
.br
     System clocks:
.br
             ID      Acronym         Description
.br
     \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br
             0       PCK             Processor clock
.br
             2       DDRCK           DDR clock
.br
             ...
.br
     Peripheral clocks:
.br
             ID      Acronym         Description
.br
     \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br
             2       ARM             Performance monitor unit (PMU)
.br
             5       GMAC            Ethernet MAC
.br
             6       XDMAC0          DMA controller 0
.br
             ...
.PP
To view the peripheral clocks that are currently enabled:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc
.br
      Peripheral ids with clocks enabled:
.br
         GMAC:       Ethernet MAC
.br
         XDMAC0:     DMA controller 0
.br
         MPDDRC:     MPDDR controller
.br
         PIOA:       Parallel I/O controller
.br
         ...
.PP
To view the system clocks that are currently enabled:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc \-s
.br
     System clocks enabled:
.br
         PCK:        Processor clock
.br
         DDRCK:      DDR clock
.br
         UHP:        The UHP48M and UHP12M OHCI clocks
.br
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of a5d2_pmc is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise it
is most likely to be 1.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2016 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B a5d2_pio_set(sama5d2_utils)
