.TH A5D2_PIO_SET "8" "February 2016" "sama5d2_utils\-0.90" SAMA5D2_UTILS
.SH NAME
a5d2_pio_set \- set Parallel I/O controller line characteristics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B a5d2_pio_set
[\fI\-b BN\fR] [\fI\-d DIV\fR] [\fI\-D DRVSTR\fR] [\fI\-e\fR] [\fI\-E EVT\fR]
[\fI\-f FUNC\fR] [\fI\-F PHY1INT2B3\fR] [\fI\-g|G\fR] [\fI\-h\fR]
[\fI\-i|I\fR] [\fI\-m|M\fR] [\fI\-p PORT\fR] [\fI\-r DIR\fR] [\fI\-s FUNC\fR]
[\fI\-S LEV\fR] [\fI\-t|T\fR] [\fI\-u|U\fR] [\fI\-v\fR] [\fI\-V\fR]
[\fI\-w WPEN\fR] [\fI\-X MSK,DAT\fR] [\fI\-z|Z\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Atmel's SAMA5D2 family of SoCs have one Parallel I/O controller for all 128
GPIO lines. Confusingly it has a single peripheral identifier (18) but it
has four interrupts, one for each bank of 32 GPIO lines (ids: 18, 68, 69
and 70). The banks are named 'A', 'B', 'C' and 'D' and by convention
each GPIO is named with a leading 'P' followed by the bank letter and
then a line number within that bank. So the 128 lines are named PA0\-PA31,
PB0\-PB31, PC0\-PC31 and PD0\-PD31. This utility accepts lower case letters
as in 'pa15' for bank 'A', line 15.
.PP
This utility sets the state of one or many GPIO lines (with some minor
exceptions). To read the state of a GPIO line use the a5d2_pio_status
utility.
.PP
The SAMA5D2 family have a single peripheral id for all PIO banks and that is
18 which is named "PIOA" (somewhat confusingly). However it has separate
interrupts for each bank (PIO is 18, PIOB is 68, PIOC is 69 and PIOD is 70).
So it seems the only sensible setting for the Power Management
Controller (PMC) with respect to the PIOs is to have peripheral id 18. Note
that many of the PIO functions will work without a PMC clock (but not generic
inputs, especially glitch and debouncing functions).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-b\fR \fIBN\fR
\fIBN\fR can be a complete GPIO line name (e.g. 'PA7' or 'pd23') or a number
between 0 and 31 inclusive. The second form (i.e. number only) requires the
\fI\-p PORT\fR option to be given to complete the GPIO line name.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR \fIDIV\fR
where \fIDIV\fR is the slow clock divider. The period of the clock used for
debouncing is 2*(\fIDIV\fR+1)*slow_clock_per . There is only one such divider
shared by all GPIO lines in all banks. This register is in the "secure" area,
its full name is "Secure PIO Slow Clock Divider Debouncing register" and
Atmel's abbreviated name is S_PIO_SCDR.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR \fIDRVSTR\fR
where \fIDIVSTR\fR is the drive strength of the given GPIO line when it is
output. There are three settings: LO, ME and HI with the values 0 and 1
meaning LO, 2 meaning ME and 3 meaning HI. \fIDRVSTR\fR can be one of those
numbers or the single letters 'L', 'M' or 'H'.
.br
This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers where "x" is 0,
1, 2, or 3 coresponding to bank 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' respectively.
.br
There are some caveats (see the SAMA5D2 family's electrical characteristics)
but broadly speaking LO can sink and source a maximum of 2 mA, ME can sink
and source a maximum of 20 mA while HI can sink and source a maximum of 32
mA. These values are for a Vddio of 3.3 volts, the maximum current drive
for a Vddio of 1.8 volts is less.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR
enumerate information held in tables by this utility. When used once, each
PIO pin is listed (32 rows by 4 column, a column for each bank. Following
each PIO name is the corresponding gpio kernel line number which run from
0 to 127. For example, one cell looks like this: "PB21: 53".
.br
When this option is used twice then all the possible peripheral function
names (up to six per PIO line) for all lines in all blanks are listed
with output like this: "PA13: SDMMC0_CD, -, -, -, FLEXCOM3_IO1, D8". To
reduce the volume of output, only one bank is shown if the \fI\-p PORT\fR
option is given. If this option is used three times additionally direction
information is output which produces output like this: "PA13:
SDMMC0_CD [i], -, -, -, FLEXCOM3_IO1 [io], D8 [io]".
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fIFUNC\fR
where \fIFUNC\fR is a single letter or digit representing the peripheral
function of the specified GPIO line. 'P' or '0' chooses the generic GPIO
function; 'A' or 1 chooses peripheral function A; 'B' or 2 chooses peripheral
function B;  'C' or 3 chooses peripheral function C; 'D' or 4 chooses
peripheral function D; 'E' or 5 chooses peripheral function E; 'F' or 6
chooses peripheral function F; and 'G' or 7 chooses peripheral function G.
.br
The SAMA5D2 family currently does not use peripheral function G.
.br
This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers where "x" is 0,
1, 2, or 3 coresponding to bank 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' respectively.
.TP
\fB\-F\fR \fIPHY1INT2B3\fR
this option controls the freeze configuration of the given GPIO line. If
\fIPHY1INT2B3\fR is 1 then the physical configuration is frozen; thereafter
the FUNC, DIR, pull-up/down, open drain, schmitt trigger and DRVSTR settings
of the given GPIO line cannot be modified. If \fIPHY1INT2B3\fR is 2 then
the interrupt configuration is frozen; thereafter the input filter (enable),
input filter slow clock (enable) and EVT settings of the given GPIO line
cannot be modified. If \fIPHY1INT2B3\fR is 3 then both the physical and
interrupt configurations are frozen.
.br
If \fIPHY1INT2B3\fR is 0 then it has no effect; values other then 0 to 3
are treated as syntax errors.
.br
This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers where "x" is 0,
1, 2, or 3 coresponding to bank 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' respectively.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
print out usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR
this option will cause the interrupt associated with the current GPIO pin
to be disabled. This option modifies the PIO_IDRx register.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR
this option will cause the interrupt associated with the current GPIO pin
to be enabled. This option modifies the PIO_IERx register.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR
this option will cause the current GPIO pin's open drain (previously called
multi-drive) capability to be disabled. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx
and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR
this option will cause the current GPIO pin's open drain (previously called
multi-drive) capability to be enabled. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx
and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR \fIPORT\fR
\fIPORT\fR may be a single letter or a number. If it is a letter then it
should be 'A', 'B', 'C' or 'D' representing a bank. If it is a number then
it is interpreted as a kernel gpio line number. These numbers range from
0 to 127; 0 to 31 are in bank 'A' and correspond to PA0 to PA31; PB0
corresponds to 32 while PBD31 cooresponds to 127.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR \fIDIR\fR
where \fIDIR\fR seta the direction of the line. When \fIDIR\f is 0 then the
given GPIO line is configured as "pure input".  When \fIDIR\f is 1 then the
given GPIO line is configured as output. This option has no effect when
\fIFUNC\fR is non generic (i.e. other than 0). This option modifies the
PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.br
Even when a line's direction is set to output, it's input value can be read.
This is useful, for example, when a line is "open drain" and its direction
is set as output and set high: another user of the same line might drive
it low and that low input value could be read on this line.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fIFUNC\fR
this option has the same action as \fI\-f FUNC\fR, se that option's
description above. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx
registers.
.TP
\fB\-S\fR \fILEV\fR
where \fILEV\fR has the value 0 or 1. 0 is the logical low value and is
close to 0 volts; 1 is the logical high value and is close to 3.3 volts
if Vddio is 3.3 volts. This option has no effect is the line \fIFUNC\fR
is other than 'G' or 0 (i.e. a generic GPIO line). Also the \fIDIR\fR of
the line must be set to output. If \fILEV\fR is 0 then the PIO_SODRx
register is modified and if \fILEV\fR is 1 then the PIO_CODRx register is
modified.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR
this option will remove the Schmitt trigger input circuitry from the given
GPIO line. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.TP
\fB\-T\fR
this option will enable the Schmitt trigger input circuitry on the given
GPIO line. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR
this option will disable the pull\-up (resistor) on the given GPIO line.
When used twice it will disable the pull\-down (resistor) on the given line.
When used three times it will disable both the pull\-up and pull\-down on
the given line. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.TP
\fB\-U\fR
this option will enable the pull\-up (resistor) on the given GPIO line.
When used twice it will enable the pull\-down (resistor) on the given line.
When used three times it will enable both the pull\-up and pull\-down on
the given line. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx registers.
.br
The pull\-up is in the range from 40 to 130 kOhms; the pull\-down is in the
range 40 to 160 kOhms.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output). Additional output
caused by this option is sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR \fIWPEN\fR
\fIWPEN\fR is placed in the WPEN bit of the write protection mode
register (PIO_WPMR). This single setting effects all lines and all banks.
Only the values 0 (for disable) and 1 (for enable) are permitted. Once
write protection is enabled the PIO mask and configuration registers can
not be changed.
.TP
\fB\-X\fR \fIMSK,DAT\fR
this option writes new values from 0 to 32 generic GPIO lines in a bank
in a single step (i.e. so all the new values appear on the outputs at
the same time). \fIMSK\fR is a 32 bit value whose bit positions (numbered 0
to 31) correspond to GPIO line numbers. When a bit is set in \fIMSK\fR
then the corresponding bit in \fIDAT\fR is written to the corresponding
generic GPIO line. Only GPIO lines whose function is generic and whose
\fIDIR\fR is output are effected.
.br
Typically the option is used together with the \fI\-p PORT\fR to specific
which bank is to be written to. If a bank cannot be deduced then bank 'A'
is used.
.br
This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx (writing \fIMSK\fR to it) and the
PIO_ODSRx register (writing \fIDAT\fR to it).
.TP
\fB\-z\fR
this option will disable the input filter slow clock setting in the
configuration register. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx
registers.
.TP
\fB\-Z\fR
this option will enable the input filter slow clock setting in the
configuration register. This option modifies the PIO_MSKRx and PIO_CFGRx
registers.
.SH ORDER OF CHANGES
When multiple actions are requested in one invocation then ther order in
which they are appiled may be significant. The following list is in
chronological order:
.TP
if disable interupts given then it is applied first
.TP
if \fI\-w WPEN\fR is given and is zero, then it is applied next
.TP
if \fI\-f FUNC\fR is given then it is applied next
.PP
And the ordering of the final few is:
.TP
if \fI\-w WPEN\fR is given and is one, then it is applied next
.TP
if enable interrupts is given then it is applied now
.TP
if freeze configuration given then it is applied last
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
xxxxxx
To view the available system and peripheral clocks:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc \-e
.br
     System clocks:
.br
             ID      Acronym         Description
.br
     \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br
             0       PCK             Processor clock
.br
             2       DDRCK           DDR clock
.br
             ...
.br
     Peripheral clocks:
.br
             ID      Acronym         Description
.br
     \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br
             2       ARM             Performance monitor unit (PMU)
.br
             5       GMAC            Ethernet MAC
.br
             6       XDMAC0          DMA controller 0
.br
             ...
.PP
To view the peripheral clocks that are currently enabled:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc
.br
      Peripheral ids with clocks enabled:
.br
         GMAC:       Ethernet MAC
.br
         XDMAC0:     DMA controller 0
.br
         MPDDRC:     MPDDR controller
.br
         PIOA:       Parallel I/O controller
.br
         ...
.PP
To view the system clocks that are currently enabled:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc \-s
.br
     System clocks enabled:
.br
         PCK:        Processor clock
.br
         DDRCK:      DDR clock
.br
         UHP:        The UHP48M and UHP12M OHCI clocks
.br
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of a5d2_pio_set is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise it
is most likely to be 1.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2016 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B a5d2_pio_status, setbits(sama5d2_utils)
