.TH A5D2_PMC "8" "January 2016" "sama5d2_utils\-0.90" SAMA5D2_UTILS
.SH NAME
a5d2_pmc \- Power Management Controller (PMC) utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B a5d2_tc_freq
[\fI\-a ACRON\fR] [\fI\-c CSS\fR] [\fI\-d DIV\fR] [\fI\-D\fR] [\fI\-e\fR]
[\fI\-E\fR]  [\fI\-g\fR] [\fI\-h\fR] [\fI\-p\fR] [\fI\-P PGC\fR] [\fI\-s\fR]
[\fI\-v\fR] [\fI\-V\fR] [\fI\-w WPEN\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Atmel's SAMA5D2 family of SoCs contains a Power Management Controller (PMC)
which achieves power reduction by allowing clocks that run other macrocells
to be slowed down or stopped. The PMC macrocell also controls the PCK0, PCK1
and PCK2 programmable clocks which are available via GPIOs.
.PP
Various system devices and peripheral devices have clocks controlled by the
PMC macrocell. Peripheral devices are identified using numeric "id"s (e.g.
TC0 (Timer Counter block 0) is 35). Some peripheral devices get two clocks:
a "peripheral clock" and a "generic clock". The peripheral clock is typically
the master clock (e.g. 166 MHz) is is enabled by the EN bit in the Peripheral
Control Register (PCM_PCR). The generic clock is enabled by the GCKEN bit is
the same register and is a lot more flexible: its clock source chosen via
the GCKCSS which can be divided by the value in the GCKDIV field.
.PP
The default action of this utility (i.e. when no options are given) is to
list peripheral ids who have their peripheral/generic clocks enabled.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-a\fR \fIACRON\fR
\fIACRON\fR is an acronym for a system or peripheral/generic clock. To
enumerate the available acronyms, use the \fI\-e\fR option. Alternatively a
number may be given which is interpreted as an identifier; in which case the
\fI\-p\fR or \fI\-s\fR oprion must be given to indicate whether the
identifier is for a system or peripheral clock.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fICSS\fR
\fICSS\fR sets the CSS field (Clock Source Selection) in the Programmable
Clock Register (PCM_PCK[0\-2]) when \fI\-P PGC\fR is also given. Alternatively
it sets the GCKCSS field in the Peripheral Control Register (PCM_PCR) when
\fI\-a ACRON\fR and otionally \fI\-p\fR is given.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR \fIDIV\fR
where \fIDIV\fR is a value from 0 to 256. The value of 0 means "leave as is".
When \fIDIV\fR is from 1 to 256 (inclusive) then one less than \fIDIV\fR is
placed in the GCKDIV field in the Peripheral Control Register (PCM_PCR).
Alternatively (\fIDIV\fR \- 1) is placed in the PRES field of the Programmable
Clock Register (PCM_PCK[0\-2]) when \fI\-P PGC\fR is also given.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR
disable (turn off) the clock going to the system or peripheral macrocell
identified by \fIACRON\fR. If a Linux driver is using the associated
macrocell then the kernel may freeze so use with care. All peripheral
clocks are disabled at reset, however the boostrap and kernel will almost
always turn some on. The kernel may only turn on a peripheral clock when
the corresponding device is in use (e.g. serial ports (i.e. usarts or uarts)
clocks are only enabled while the corresponding serial port (e.g. /dev/ttyS2)
is open).
.br
For peripheral ids, if used once (i.e. '\-D') the peripheral clock is
disabled (by clearing the EN bit in PCM_PCR); if used twice the generic clock
is disabled (by clearing the GCKEN bit in PCM_PCR); and if used thrice both
clocks are disabled.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR
enumerate the available system and peripheral clocks. A separate table for
each is shown. Each table contains an ID, acronym and description column.
.TP
\fB\-E\fR
enable (turn on) the clock going to the system or peripheral macrocell
identified by \fIACRON\fR. For peripheral ids, if used once (i.e. '\-E')
the peripheral clock is enabled (with the EN bit in PCM_PCR); if used
twice the generic clock is enabled (with the GCKEN bit in PCM_PCR); and
if used thrice both clocks are enabled.
.TP
\fB\-g\fR
using this option makes the \fI\-E\fR or \fI\-D\fR option apply to the
peripheral device's generic clock. With this option if \fI\-E\fR or
\fI\-D\fR are used twice then both the generic and peripheral clocks are
enabled or disabled.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
print out usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR
if \fIACRON\fR is not given then this option will list peripheral clocks
that are enabled. If \fIACRON\fR is a number then this option indicates
that it refers to a peripheral clock.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR \fIPGC\fR
where \fIPGC\fR is the Programmable Clock number which should be 0, 1 or 2
corresponding to the PCK0, PCK1 or PCK2 lines respectively. These
programmable clocks are available via GPIOs (e.g. PCK1 is available
from PC27 when it is set to peripheral function C). If neither \fI\-E\fR
nor \fI\-D\fR is given with this option then the state of the programmable
clock is output.
.br
If \fI\-E\fR is given together with this option then the corresponding
programmable clock is enabled. Optionally \fI\-c CSS\fR and/or
\fI\-d DIV\fR can be given to set those characteristics of the programmable
clock being enabled; if they are not given then the previous settinfs are
maintained.
.br
If \fI\-D\fR is given together with this option then the corresponding
programmable clock is disabled.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR
if \fIACRON\fR is not given then this option will list system clocks that
are enabled. If \fIACRON\fR is a number then this option indicates that it
refers to a system clock.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output). Additional output
caused by this option is sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR \fIWPEN\fR
if \fIWPEN\fR is 0 then this utility will attempt to disable the write
protect feature on the TCB associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR. If \fIWPEN\fR is
1 then this utility will attempt to enable the write protect feature on the
TCB associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR. If \fIWPEN\fR is \-1 then this utility
will attempt to show the current state of the write protect feature on this
TCB. This utility will exit immediately after the actions associated with
this option.
.SH NOTES
The SAMA5D2 Power Management Controller (PMC) reduces power by turning off
the master clock going to various macrocells. At power up almost all
macrocells are turned off. During boot up the kernel turns on those
macrocell clocks that it needs.
.SH EXAMPLES
To view the available system and peripheral clocks:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc \-e
.br
     System clocks:
.br
             ID      Acronym         Description
.br
     \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br
             0       PCK             Processor clock
.br
             2       DDRCK           DDR clock
.br
             ...
.br
     Peripheral clocks:
.br
             ID      Acronym         Description
.br
     \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-
.br
             2       ARM             Performance monitor unit (PMU)
.br
             5       GMAC            Ethernet MAC
.br
             6       XDMAC0          DMA controller 0
.br
             ...
.PP
To view the peripheral clocks that are currently enabled:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc
.br
      Peripheral ids with clocks enabled:
.br
         GMAC:       Ethernet MAC
.br
         XDMAC0:     DMA controller 0
.br
         MPDDRC:     MPDDR controller
.br
         PIOA:       Parallel I/O controller
.br
         ...
.PP
To view the system clocks that are currently enabled:
.PP
   a5d2_pmc \-s
.br
     System clocks enabled:
.br
         PCK:        Processor clock
.br
         DDRCK:      DDR clock
.br
         UHP:        The UHP48M and UHP12M OHCI clocks
.br
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of a5d2_pmc is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise it
is most likely to be 1.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2016 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B a5d2_tc_freq(sama5d2_utils)
