.TH A5D2_TC_FREQ "8" "January 2016" "sama5d2_utils\-0.90" SAMA5D2_UTILS
.SH NAME
a5d2_tc_freq \- generate frequencies with TC macrocell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B a5d2_tc_freq
\fI\-b PIO_TIO\fR [\fI\-d\fR] [\fI\-D\fR] [\fI\-e\fR] [\fI\-f FN\fR]
[\fI\-h\fR] [\fI\-i\fR] [\fI\-I\fR] [\fI\-m M,S\fR] [\fI\-M\fR] [\fI\-n\fR]
[\fI\-N\fR] [\fI\-p F1,D1[,F2,D2...]\fR] [\fI\-u\fR] [\fI\-v\fR] [\fI\-V\fR]
[\fI\-w WPEN\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" Add any additional description here
.PP
Atmel's SAMA5D2 family of SoCs contains two Timer Counter Block
macrocells (TCB0 and TCB1) each containing three 32 bit Timer Counters (TC).
TCB0 contains TC0, TC1 and TC2 while TCB1 contains TC3, TC4 and TC5. In the
simplest case this utility configures the given TC to produce a frequency
for a given duration.  A list of frequency, duration pairs can be given (as
a command line option or in a file) that is played. By default a square
wave is produced; its mark\-space ratio can be specified.
.PP
This utility could be used to play simple tunes on a small buzzer driven by
a PIO line (i.e. a GPIO line). Even with HI_DRIVE the GPIO line may not
have sufficient current to drive the buzzer, so a transistor may be
needed (and a back EMF protection diode across the buzzer is recommended).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-b\fR \fIPIO_TIO\fR
\fIPIO_TIO\fR should be either a PIO name (e.g. 'PC2') or TIO
name (e.g. 'TIOB3'). Use \fI\-e\fR to enumerate the valid PIO names and
their corresponding TIO names.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
dummy mode: decode frequency,duration pairs, print them then exit. Ignore
\fIPIO_TIO\fR if given.
.TP
\fB\-D\fR
after initial checks, run as daemon which exits after frequencies are
are produced.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR
enumerate TC associated PIO names with corresponding TIO names then exit.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fIFN\fR
read frequency,duration pairs from a file called \fIFN\fR. See the section
on FREQUENCY/DURATION PAIRS below.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
print out usage message then exit.
.TP
\fB\-i\fR
initialize GPIO pin associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR for frequency output. The
default action is to leave that GPIO pin with the peripheral setting it
had prior to calling this utility. The Power Management Controller (PMC)
is also set up for the TCB containing the TC associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR.
.TP
\fB\-I\fR
invert levels of mark and space. The default level for mark is
high (typically 3.3 volts) while the default level for space is
low (typically 0 volts).
.TP
\fB\-m\fR \fIM,S\fR
The generated frequency is a square wave by default. This option will change
the mark (\fIM\fR) space (\fIS\fR) ratio (def: 1,1). Technically 2,2 should
also be a square wave but is more likely to fail at higher frequencies (say
.TP
\fB\-M\fR
prints out interrupt mask register associated with TC. This requires the
\fI\-b PIO_TIO\fR option to determine which TC. If any bits of a TC's
interrupt mask register are set then it may well indicate that something
else (e.g. the kernel) is using that TC. This utility will exit immediately
after it has printed the mask.
.TP
\fB\-n\fR
precise starting and stopping of TC generated frequencies depends on the
process running this utility being scheduled back in promptly when a
duration has expired. To this end, the default action is to give this process
a (realtime) scheduling policy of SCHED_FIFO at the minimum priority level.
This option bypasses the realtime scheduling step so this process competes
with other normal processes on an equal footing. Best to use this option if
the realtime scheduling causes some unwanted side effect.
.TP
\fB\-N\fR
no PIO. The default action, at least when the \fI\-i\fR or \fI\-u\fR option
is given, is to modify the PIO line (i.e. GPIO) associated with the TC output
so the square wave is available externally. This may not be desirable as that
PIO line may be needed for something else (e.g. TIOA3 is PC0 but that line
is needed for the 10/100 ethernet interface (it's ETX0)). Rather than output
the square wave to a PIO line, it could be used to generate an interrupt.
This option suppresses any changes that would otherwise be made to the PIO
line associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR .
.TP
\fB\-p\fR \fIF1,D1[,F2,D2...]\fR
the argument to this option is one or more frequency/duration pairs. See the
FREQUENCY/DURATION PAIRS section below.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR
restore the GPIO line associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR to generic PIO mode when
this utility is complete (i.e. when all duration are exhausted and just
before exiting).
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
increase the level of verbosity, (i.e. debug output). Additional output
caused by this option is sent to stderr.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
print the version string and then exit.
.TP
\fB\-w\fR \fIWPEN\fR
if \fIWPEN\fR is 0 then this utility will attempt to disable the write
protect feature on the TCB associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR. If \fIWPEN\fR is
1 then this utility will attempt to enable the write protect feature on the
TCB associated with \fIPIO_TIO\fR. If \fIWPEN\fR is -1 then this utility
will attempt to show the current state of the write protect feature on this
TCB. This utility will exit immediately after the actions associated with
this option.
.SH FREQUENCY/DURATION PAIRS
Both the file referred to by \fIFN\fR and the argument to the \fI\-p\fR
option contain frequency/duration pairs (one one should be given). They
are comma separated however more flexible formatting is allowed in the
the file referred to by \fIFN\fR such as whitespace and newline separators.
The \fIFN\fR file may also contain the '#' character for comment and the
rest of that line is ignored.
.PP
The frequency value can be positive, zero or negative. A positive value
is interpreted as a frequency in hertz (i.e. cycles per second). The zero
value is interpreted forcing the line low (typically 0 volts) for the
associated duration. A negative value is interpreted as a period (negated
to remove the minus sign) with the units of milliseconds. So \-1 is a
period of 1 millisecond (i.e. 1000 Hz) while \-2500 is a period of 2.5
seconds. At the end of each frequency generation by the TC unit the GPIO
line is set low.
.PP
The duration value can be positive or \-1. If it is positive then the value
is a duration, in milliseconds, to maintain the associated frequency. If
\-1 then it means continual. In the continual case the \fI\-i\fR option
is assumed (even if not given), the TC is configured to produce the
associated frequency and this utility exits. Any frequency/duration
pairs after one with continual duration are ignored.
.PP
Assuming a master clock (MCK) of 132 MHz the maximum square wave frequency
that can generated is 33 MHz. Dividers may have been applied in the PMC
for either TCB0 or TCB1 that may divide this maximum frequency by 2, 4
or 8. At the maximum frequency, only a square with a mark space ratio of
1:1 can be generated.
Assuming a slow clock (SLCK) of 32768 Hz the longest period (implying the
lowest frequency) that can generated is 131071.999 seconds.
.PP
The argument to the \fI\-p\fR option (i.e. the frequency/duration pairs) may
contain a space or tab as a separator but the argument would need to be
quoted (e.g. surrounded by double quotes) to stop the shell interpreting
them as unassociated command line arguments.
.SH NOTES
The SAMA5D2 Power Management Controller (PMC) reduces power by turning off
the master clock going to various macrocells. At power up almost all
macrocells are turned off. During boot up the kernel turns on those
macrocell clocks that it needs.
.PP
In the case of the time counters there is a PMC clock for each time counter
block (TCB): so there is one clock for TCB0 and another for TCB1. Depending
on how the kernel is configured, it may turn on the PMC clock for TCB0. Also
to save a little more power, the PMC may run a macrocell at a reduced
frequency, typically the master clock frequency divided by 2, 4 or 8. For
a TC these reduced master clock frequencies will lower the maximum frequency
of square wave that can be produced. Since a PMC clock is shared by all three
TCs in a TCB, the user should take care changing that divider if other TCs in
the TCB are already in use.
.SH EXAMPLES
To view the available PIO and TIO names:
.PP
   a5d2_tc_freq \-e
.br
      PD5       <->     TIOA0   [peripheral: B]
.br
      PD6       <->     TIOB0   [peripheral: B]
.br
      PC12      <->     TIOA1   [peripheral: B]
.br
      ...
.PP
To generate 1 kHz square for 2 seconds on TIOA1:
.PP
   a5d2_tc_freq \-b PC12 \-i \-p 1000,2000
.br
or
.br
   a5d2_tc_freq \-b TIOA1 \-i \-p 1000,2000
.br
or
.br
   a5d2_tc_freq \-b TIOA1 \-i \-p -1,2000
.PP
To generate 1 MHz with a mark/space ratio of 2:1 indefinitely:
.PP
   a5d2_tc_freq \-b PC12 \-i \-m 2,1 \-p 1000000,-1
.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of a5d2_tc_freq is 0 when it is successful. Otherwise it
is most likely to be 1.
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Douglas Gilbert.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <dgilbert at interlog dot com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2013 Douglas Gilbert
.br
This software is distributed under a FreeBSD license. There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.B a5d2_pmc(sama5d2_utils)
